COLT MCANLIS: In the mystical
world of compression,
there's one algorithm that
constantly puzzles developers.
Its ability to
compress data so well
is shrouded in ancient secrets
of statistical probability.
I'm talking, of course,
of arithmetic compression,
the de facto statistical
compressor that
has its hands in every part
of the modern compression
industry.
Everything you see online,
from images to videos, and even
your text data, has
been sent through
its enchanted algorithm.
Writing an arithmetic compressor
yourself is no easy task.
It requires you to stare
into the face of the unknown
and accept what it
has to tell you.
But fear not, young programmer,
because I'm here to help.
My name is Colt McAnlis,
and this is Compressor Head.
Now, if you remember,
variable length
codes or, VLCs, take a given
symbol from our input stream
and assigns a code
word to it that
has a variable number of bits.
That VLC is then pushed
to the output stream,
producing a compressed
version of our data.
The trick is that
variable length codes
produce compression
that's close to entropy,
as long as the probability
of your symbol distribution
matches the probability
table that you've
built your VLC from.
But the trick is that VLCs are
generated with a specific set
of probabilities in mind.
For example, here--
aha, there we go.
Let's take a look at Omega
codes next to Even Rodeh codes.
You can see that, for
these two VLC types,
they're not equal for
every given value of n.
This is because of the
statistical probabilities
that they've made
assumptions towards.
See, Omega codes
expect that there's not
going to be lots and lots
of most probable symbols.
If we end up with
a lot of symbols
that are close in probability
or have a shared probability,
then we get into trouble.
Omega codes are weighted
towards having a dominant symbol
with the most probability,
while everything else trails off
in very small amounts.
Even Rodeh codes,
on the other hand,
expect that the top four
symbols are actually
pretty close in
probability to each other.
But once you hit the eighth
most probable symbol,
the code word size
increases dramatically.
This expects there
to be a grouping
of symbols that are pretty
close and a drop off after that.
As such, you run into a problem.
What if the probability
distribution
of your data stream doesn't
match your chosen VLC set?
Well, in that case,
you get bloat.
You'll end up with
code words that are not
minimal, and as such,
your compressed stream
won't be equal to entropy.
This is the trouble
that most folks
have with practical
implementations
of variable length codes.
Which VLC do we use
for our data that
gives us the best compression?
I mean, it's not like we can
iterate through every VLC
and find the best match.
I mean, that would
just take way too long.
Instead, we want
some way to encode
a stream that optimizes
for a probability,
without having to fit some
pre-existing statistical table.
And this, my friend, is
where arithmetic compression
comes in.
Jorma Rissanen pr-- published--
Most standard literature
that discusses
arithmetic compression puts it
a little something like this.
[CLEARS THROAT] (IN
ELEGANT SPEAKING VOICE)
"In contrast to VLCs, which
assign a code word per symbol,
arithmetic compression
assigns one code word
to the entire data stream."
Which is elegantly
stated, but really
doesn't tell us anything.
I mean, what kind of
code should we actually
apply to that stream?
If I'm given AZZ as an input,
I can really pick any number.
I mean, if I make it
12626, that's cool, right?
But that ends up
bloating the stream.
Or I can make AZZ equals 1,
but how would I decompress that
later?
See, the magic of
arithmetic compression
is a data transform that is
applied to the source data
in order to create a
single output number which
uses less bits to represent
than the source stream itself.
But let's not get too
far ahead of ourselves.
First, let's talk
about binary search.
Am I-- am I not
toitally-- toitally?
Let's say I search for the value
6 in the number range 0 to 9.
A binary search works by
dividing the space in half
repeatedly, until
we find our number.
So effectively, we
start with low equals 0
and high equals 9, which means
the number that we're checking
is the 5.
Now, if 6 is greater than 5,
which it is, we erase our low
and move it around so that
low is now equal to 5,
and we're checking 7.
Now, we continue doing this
process of subdividing space
in half each iteration until
we find the number that we're
looking for.
But now the question is, what
if, instead of subdividing
our space in half
each iteration,
we instead subdivide it in
thirds, fourths, or 16ths?
For example, let's subdivide our
number space into four parts.
And when we choose what
section we're looking for,
we subdivide that into
four parts as well.
This concept of subdividing
the space each time
we refine our
search is the basis
for how arithmetic
transforms work.
Effectively, we
assign a subspace
to each one of our symbols.
When we encode the symbol
C from our input stream,
we subdivide C space further,
assigning new symbols
to the space in
the proper order.
And this continues on.
Every single input that we
grab subdivides the space
into smaller and smaller
subsections each step,
but with one simple
modification.
Rather than subdividing
our search space
into equal portions,
we subdivide
it based on probabilities of
the symbols in our stream,
kind of like our
code word tables.
So if C is the most probable
symbol, it gets the most space.
Now, in order for this to
work, we need our number range
to be something that makes sense
to actually be subdividing,
so I mean we can't use integers.
Instead, we will
subdivide our number space
and define it existing
on the range, 0 to 1.
And then that allows us
to assign each symbol
an area on the word space
that's equal to its probability.
And this right here, my
friends, is the starting process
of how arithmetic
compression works.
But enough chit chat.
Let's encode something.
So let's take an example with
three symbols, R, G, and B,
with the probabilities of 0.4,
0.5, and 0.1, respectively.
Now, it's pretty easy, given the
probabilities of these values,
to assign them ranges on
the interval of 0 to 1.
Or perhaps there's a better way
to look at this, in number line
form.
Let's encode a
simple string, GGB.
First, we pull the symbol
G from the input stream.
And since the interval of
G, according to our table,
is 0.4 to 0.9, we then
subdivide our space,
giving us the values
between 0.4 and 0.9,
respectively, which sets
our low and high values, 0.4
to 0.59999.
G actually ends up
being 0.6 to 0.84999999.
And B ends up being
0.85 to 0.999999.
It's now time to read the
second symbol from our stream.
It's a G, once again.
When we read our B value,
we subdivide that interval
once again.
After encoding B, our final
interval is now 0.825 and 0.85.
This is the range that we want
to output as our encoded value.
Now, congratulations.
You've actually just
arithmetically encoded
a stream.
Now, decoding can be
viewed as the same process,
but in reverse.
Now, since our final value
range is 0.825 to 0.85,
honestly, we can now put
any value between those two
to our encoded stream.
So let's just randomly pick a
value and say that it's 0.83.
The decoding process
can be thought
of as drawing a vertical line
through our subdivided ranges,
updating the intervals
as we move down.
So if we start with
0.83, the symbol
for that range that it
falls in is the letter G,
so we output that
as our first symbol.
Then we subdivide that space.
And 0.83 once again
falls in the G area,
which is our second symbol.
And finally, 0.83
falls in the B range,
which is our final symbol.
There you go,
encoding and decoding
of arithmetic compression
all in one nice package.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm good?
Remember this guy?
Besides inventing a plethora of
variable length code patterns,
Peter Elias first
proposed the concept
behind arithmetic compression
in the early 1960s.
It wasn't until a
decade later, though,
when Jorma Rissanen published
some of the first symbol
research for its implementation,
alongside a massive patent.
For the next couple of
decades, arithmetic compression
pretty much fell off the map
due to an impossibly aggressive
patent strategy enforced
by IBM at the time.
The patent problem
was so aggressive
and arithmetic
compression was so good
that a separate coding
algorithm, called range coding,
was invented in
1979, which basically
did the same thing as
arithmetic compression,
but was free from patents.
Nothing like a good
government system
to stifle creativity, huh?
OK.
You know, I really
don't think this is all
really that necessary.
I mean, it's just a
comment on a video.
What have we got here?
We've got another signature?
Fine.
I don't even know
what this says.
Initial, too.
You guys, of course,
need an initial.
So really, I think that--
EULA FRUMPKINS: And here.
COLT MCANLIS: You guys
need blood samples and hair
and everything else too?
EULA FRUMPKINS: Just signatures.
COLT MCANLIS: OK, fine.
Listen, I'm very busy.
Can I at least back to all this?
EULA FRUMPKINS:
Let me just check.
COLT MCANLIS: You're
going to check it all.
OK, thanks.
EULA FRUMPKINS: Thank you.
COLT MCANLIS: In
the early 2000s,
though, the patent expired.
And arithmetic compression
took off again,
allowing itself to
achieve the status
of the gold standard for
the current generation
of statistical encoders.
In fact, the majority of
modern compression formats
for archives, like
LZMA and BZIP,
audio and video, like
JPEG, WEBP, WEBM, and H.264
all work with an arithmetic
compression system
as its statistical
compression step.
So here's the tricky part
with arithmetic compression.
Why the hell does it work?
I mean, it's a simple
concept, but how does it
get us close to entropy?
Well, it has everything to do
with probability, distribution,
and how we subdivide our space.
So let's try to subdivide
our space evenly.
If we've got 10 values and we
subdivide our space between 0.2
and 0.3, we end up with 10
new ranges, starting at,
0.2, 0.21, 0.22, 0.23,
0.24, 0.25, 0.26,
0.27, 0.28, and 0.29.
Look at what just happened.
By subdividing our
space, our range values
have been increased
in size by one digit.
If we stopped right
now, all of our outputs
would be two digits in length.
So if we subdivided
any of them again,
we would end up with
three digits per range.
And if we divided
those regions, we'd
end up with four digits per
range, and so on, and so on.
Can we--- let's move
it really quick.
Fantastic.
Thank you, so much.
All right.
Now, let's subdivide
that space unevenly
and, just for the
sake of argument,
give one range
9/10 of the space.
So we'd end up with the starting
spaces of 0.2, 0.291, 0.292,
0.293, 0.294, 0.295, 0.296,
0.297, 0.298, and 0.299.
Now, look at that.
Every time we fall in this first
range, going from 0.2 to 0.291,
we're outputting less
digits to the output stream.
At best, we could simply
use the lower bound
of 0.2, which is less digits
than any other starting
value in our range.
And at best, we don't end
up outputting any new digits
to our output code at all.
Even if we're 10,024 levels
deep into the subdivision tree,
picking this first range
will output less digits
to our output,
and at best cases,
won't put out any
new digits at all.
This skewing of unit space
based on the probability
of the symbol is
the core idea that
makes arithmetic compression
a statistical compressor.
Effectively, the more
probable the symbol,
the less digits it
outputs to our encoding.
Props.
When all the dust settles,
arithmetic compression
can consistently
get close to entropy
for arbitrary streams,
regardless of the data type
or the probability of
its symbol distribution.
It's single minded focus
makes it a Swiss army knife
of statistical compression.
But there's a large
battle between Huffman
and arithmetic in the minds
of compression programmers
out there.
Some claim that the Huffman king
is dead, long live arithmetic
compression, while the
true believers claim
that the king is
alive and well, living
under the alias, dynamic
Huffman encoding.
But that's for a
different episode.
My name is Colt McAnlis.
Thanks, for watching.
[MUSIC PLAYING]